README.md, before:

# Flying Base Station Optimization using Genetic Algorithms

This project implements a Genetic Algorithm (GA) to optimize the **3D location** and **transmission power** of **Flying Base Stations (FBSs)**. The goal is to maximize user connectivity while minimizing transmission power, using a realistic SINR evaluation framework based on **QuaDRiGa** propagation models.

---

## Project Structure
your_project_folder/
│
├── optimize_base_station_ga.m          # Main script to run the optimization
│
├── optimizeBaseStation.m               # Core GA loop
├── optimizeBaseStationMoga.m           # Multi-objective GA (Pareto front)
├── evaluatePopulation.m                # Fitness evaluation logic (based on SINR)
├── SINREvaluation.m                    # SINR and connectivity computation
│
├── initializePopulation_ppp.m          # Population init using Matern Point Process
├── initializePopulation_sobol.m        # (Optional) Sobol initialization
│
├── selectParents.m                     # Tournament parent selection
├── mutate.m                            # Gaussian + Bernoulli mutation
├── crossover_blend.m                   # Blend crossover operator
├── crossover_sbx.m                     # Simulated Binary Crossover (optional)
├── crossover.m                         # Arithmetic crossover (optional)
│
├── reflectToBounds.m                   # Ensures individuals stay within bounds
├── clampToBounds.m                     # Clamps values between bounds
├── mergeParams.m                       # Merge user-defined and default parameters
├── maternPP.m                          # Generates repulsive FBS layouts
│
└── README.md                           # You are here

---

## Call Order and Execution Flow

1. **`optimize_base_station_ga.m`**
   - Initializes antennas and GA parameters
   - Calls `optimizeBaseStation(...)`
   - Optionally launches `optimizeBaseStationMoga(...)` to trace the Pareto front

2. **`optimizeBaseStation.m`**
   - Initializes population via `initializePopulation_ppp(...)`
   - Evaluates fitness using `evaluatePopulation(...)`
   - Applies GA operators: `selectParents`, `crossover_blend`, `mutate`
   - Tracks and visualizes best solutions

3. **`evaluatePopulation.m`**
   - Computes fitness based on number of connected users and total power
   - Calls `SINREvaluation(...)`

4. **`SINREvaluation.m`**
   - Computes SINR using QuaDRiGa `power_map` functions
   - Returns number of connected users and total transmitted power

---

## Dependencies

- MATLAB R2021b or later
- [QuaDRiGa](https://quadriga-channel-model.de) channel simulator (installed and licensed)
- Required Toolboxes:
  - Optimization Toolbox
  - Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox

---

## How to Run

Run the optimization from the MATLAB command window:

```matlab
>> optimize_base_station_ga
```
To modify the optimization behavior, edit the params struct inside optimize_base_station_ga.m:

```
params = struct(...
    'populationSize', 10, ...
    'numGenerations', 10, ...
    'crossoverProb', 0.3, ...
    'mutationProb', 0.7, ...
    'numBS', numBS, ...
    'bounds', repmat([0 1500; 0 1500; 20 150; 7 10.5; 0 1], numBS, 1), ...
    'mutationScale', 0.17, ...
    'spaceLimit', 1500, ... 
    'verbose', 1 ...
);
```

### Observing the Pareto Front (MOGA)

The script now enables the multi-objective GA branch by default (`runMoga = true`). This path invokes `optimizeBaseStationMoga`, which:

- Treats connected users (maximize) and transmitted power (minimize) as separate objectives through NSGA-II.
- Builds and prints the final Pareto-optimal table (`ConnectedUsers`, `TransmittedPowerW`, `AvgRatebpsHz`).
- Generates a Pareto front plot showing how solutions evolve per generation.

To skip the multi-objective stage, set `runMoga = false` inside `optimize_base_station_ga.m`.

Commit message:

modified evaluation - added more outputs for tracing in SINREval - plotting improved - logging feature added - cost function modified - moga prototyped

README.md, after:

# Flying Base Station Optimization using Genetic Algorithms

This project implements a Genetic Algorithm (GA) to optimize the **3D location** and **transmission power** of **Flying Base Stations (FBSs)**. The goal is to maximize user connectivity while minimizing transmission power, using a realistic SINR evaluation framework based on **QuaDRiGa** propagation models.

---

## Project Structure
your_project_folder/
│
├── optimize_base_station_ga.m          # Main script to run the optimization
│
├── optimizeBaseStation.m               # Core GA loop
├── optimizeBaseStationMoga.m           # Multi-objective GA (Pareto front)
├── evaluatePopulation.m                # Fitness evaluation logic (based on SINR)
├── SINREvaluation.m                    # SINR and connectivity computation
│
├── initializePopulation_ppp.m          # Population init using Matern Point Process
├── initializePopulation_sobol.m        # (Optional) Sobol initialization
│
├── selectParents.m                     # Tournament parent selection
├── mutate.m                            # Gaussian + Bernoulli mutation
├── crossover_blend.m                   # Blend crossover operator
├── crossover_sbx.m                     # Simulated Binary Crossover (optional)
├── crossover.m                         # Arithmetic crossover (optional)
│
├── reflectToBounds.m                   # Ensures individuals stay within bounds
├── clampToBounds.m                     # Clamps values between bounds
├── mergeParams.m                       # Merge user-defined and default parameters
├── maternPP.m                          # Generates repulsive FBS layouts
│
└── README.md                           # You are here

---

## Call Order and Execution Flow

1. **`optimize_base_station_ga.m`**
   - Initializes antennas and GA parameters
   - Calls `optimizeBaseStation(...)`
   - Optionally launches `optimizeBaseStationMoga(...)` to trace the Pareto front

2. **`optimizeBaseStation.m`**
   - Initializes population via `initializePopulation_ppp(...)`
   - Evaluates fitness using `evaluatePopulation(...)`
   - Applies GA operators: `selectParents`, `crossover_blend`, `mutate`
   - Tracks and visualizes best solutions

3. **`evaluatePopulation.m`**
   - Computes fitness based on number of connected users and total power
   - Calls `SINREvaluation(...)`

4. **`SINREvaluation.m`**
   - Computes SINR using QuaDRiGa `power_map` functions
   - Returns number of connected users and total transmitted power

---

## Dependencies

- MATLAB R2021b or later
- [QuaDRiGa](https://quadriga-channel-model.de) channel simulator (installed and licensed)
- Required Toolboxes:
  - Optimization Toolbox
  - Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox

---

## How to Run

Run the optimization from the MATLAB command window:

```matlab
>> optimize_base_station_ga
```
To modify the optimization behavior, edit the params struct inside optimize_base_station_ga.m:

```
params = struct(...
    'populationSize', 10, ...
    'numGenerations', 10, ...
    'initialPopulationSize', 20, ...
    'crossoverProb', 0.3, ...
    'mutationProb', 0.7, ...
    'fitnessWeights', struct('beta', 1.0, 'gamma', 1.0, 'epsilon', 1e-3, 'fbsWeight', 0.0, 'fbsExponent', 1.0), ...
    'plotTrajectory', false, ...
    'maxUsers', 1000, ...
    'sinrThreshold', 5, ...
    'enableLogging', true, ...
    'logFile', 'ga_results_log.csv', ...
    'numBS', numBS, ...
    'bounds', repmat([0 1500; 0 1500; 20 150; 7 10.5; 0 1], numBS, 1), ...
    'mutationScale', 0.17, ...
    'spaceLimit', 1500, ... 
    'verbose', 1 ...
);
```

`initialPopulationSize` lets you sample a larger (or smaller) random pool for generation 0 and then down-select to `populationSize` before evolution begins. Set `plotTrajectory = true` (currently for single-FBS runs) to watch the population’s X-Y-Z locations update each generation, with active individuals marked by `o` and inactive ones by `x`. `maxUsers` and `sinrThreshold` also feed into the SINR evaluation (instead of hard-coded values). Inside `fitnessWeights`, `beta` controls how strongly connectivity is rewarded, `gamma` controls how aggressively transmit power is penalized, `epsilon` prevents singularities, while `fbsWeight` (0–1) blends in an extra term that rewards the fraction of users attached to FBS nodes (shaped by `fbsExponent`). When `enableLogging` is true each run writes a timestamped CSV under `logs/` (e.g., `logs/ga_results_YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS.csv`) capturing the hyperparameters, number of FBSs, best individual locations, and resulting connectivity/power stats for offline analysis.

### Observing the Pareto Front (MOGA)

The script now enables the multi-objective GA branch by default (`runMoga = true`). This path invokes `optimizeBaseStationMoga`, which:

- Treats connected users (maximize) and transmitted power (minimize) as separate objectives through NSGA-II.
- Builds and prints the final Pareto-optimal table (`ConnectedUsers`, `TransmittedPowerW`, `AvgRatebpsHz`).
- Generates a Pareto front plot showing how solutions evolve per generation.

To skip the multi-objective stage, set `runMoga = false` inside `optimize_base_station_ga.m`.
